[Joy] Add `Table` component (#35872)
mui/material-ui: docs/data/joy/components/table/table.md

---
product: joy-ui
title: React Table component
githubLabel: 'component: table'
waiAria: https://www.w3.org/WAI/ARIA/apg/patterns/table/
---

# Table

<p class="description">Tables display sets of data. They can be fully customized.</p>

## Introduction

> Joy UI Table lets you use plain HTML structure and turn it into a nice looking table. It has robust configuration that covers all of the basic needs for any projects.

Author: > What are the specific features worth highlighting here? 

Maybe it is too excessive, the demos already show what it can do.

{{"demo": "TableUsage.js", "hideToolbar": true, "bg": "gradient"}}

{{"component": "modules/components/ComponentLinkHeader.js", "design": false}}

> ## Basics

Reviewer: I think this section could use a few sentences—and maybe links to relevant resources—about the various HTML table tags that you can use.

Author: Added!

```jsx
import Table from '@mui/joy/Table';
```

{{"demo": "BasicTable.js"}}

:::info
By default, **header** cells (`<th>`) contain `surface` background color whereas **data** cells (`<td>`) does not have a background.
:::

## Customization

### Column width

Use `sx` prop to target the header and provide the width as a number or percentage.

The columns that don't have explicit width will spread equally to the rest of the area.

{{"demo": "TableColumnWidth.js"}}

:::info
Table component uses [`fixed`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/table-layout) layout to let you control the width of each column.

To learn more why we take this approach, check out this [great article](https://css-tricks.com/fixing-tables-long-strings/).
:::

#### Inline style

> An alternative way of controlling the column's width is to use [inline style](https://reactjs.org/docs/dom-elements.html#style) on the `th` element:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An alternative way of controlling the column's width is to use [inline styles](https://reactjs.org/docs/dom-elements.html#style) on the `<th>` element:
```

```js
<thead>
  <tr>
    <th style={{ width: '40%' }}>Column 1</th>
    <th style={{ width: '64px' }}>Column 2</th>
  </tr>
</thead>
```

### Alignment

> Use `sx` prop to target columns with appropriate CSS selector and apply the [text-align](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-align) property.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `sx` prop to target columns with the appropriate CSS selector and apply the [`text-align`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/text-align) property.
```

```js

> // target cells that are not the first of its row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// target cells that are not the first in their respective rows.
```

<Table sx={{ '& tr > *:not(:first-child)': { textAlign: 'right' } }}>
```

{{"demo": "TableAlignment.js"}}

### Variants

Table supports Joy UI's four [global variants](/joy-ui/main-features/global-variants/): `plain` (default), `outlined`, `soft`, and `solid`.

{{"demo": "TableVariants.js"}}

:::info
To learn how to add your own variants, check out [Themed components—Extend variants](/joy-ui/customization/themed-components/#extend-variants).
Note that you lose the global variants when you add custom variants.
:::

### Sizes

The component comes in three sizes: `sm`, `md` (default), and `lg`.

{{"demo": "TableSizes.js"}}

:::info
To learn how to add custom sizes to the component, check out [Themed components—Extend sizes](/joy-ui/customization/themed-components/#extend-sizes).
:::

> ### Stripe

Reviewer: Can we get a sentence or two here to explain what this is?

{{"demo": "TableStripe.js"}}

:::success

> The prop also supports complex argument of [`:nth-child()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:nth-child#syntax) CSS selector.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `stripe` prop supports complex arguments with the [`:nth-child()`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/:nth-child#syntax) CSS selector.
```

> For example, you can use `3n` as a value to create stripes on row number three, six, nine, and so on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, you can use `3n` as a value to create stripes on row numbers three, six, nine, and so on:
```

```js
<Table stripe="3n">
```

:::

### Hover

> To highlight a row of the table body when hover on it, set `hoverAxis` prop to true.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To highlight a row of the table body when hovering over it, set the `hoverAxis` prop to true.
```

{{"demo": "TableHover.js"}}

### Border

> Use `borderAxis` prop to control the border appearance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the `borderAxis` prop to control the border appearance.
```

{{"demo": "TableBorder.js"}}

<details>

> <summary><b>Adding custom values</b></summary>

Reviewer: I think this collapsing menu would be better as a simple h4 section.

> Customize the table theme based on `borderAxis` prop using [`extendTheme()`](/joy-ui/customization/themed-components/#change-styles-based-on-props) function.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Customize the table theme based on `borderAxis` prop using the [`extendTheme()`](/joy-ui/customization/themed-components/#change-styles-based-on-props) function.
```

```js
import { CssVarsProvider, extendTheme } from '@mui/joy/styles';

const theme = extendTheme({
  components: {
    JoyTable: {
      styleOverrides: {
        root: ({ ownerState }) => ({
          ...(ownerState.borderAxis === 'header' && {
            '& thead th:not([colspan])': {
              border: '2px solid var(--TableCell-borderColor)',
            },
          }),
        });
      }
    }
  }
})

<CssVarsProvider theme={theme}>…</CssVarsProvider>
```

> For **TypeScript**, you have to add the new values via module augmentation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For TypeScript, you have to add the new values via module augmentation:
```

```ts
// this could be any file that's included in your tsconfig.json
declare module '@mui/joy/Table' {
  interface TablePropsBorderAxisOverrides {
    header: true;
  }
}
```

</details>

### Sticky header

> Set `stickyHeader` prop to true. The table must be a child of a fixed-height element with overflow `auto` (or `scroll`).

Reviewer: It might seem obvious what this prop does, but we shouldn't assume that every user understands the name.

```suggestion
Set the `stickyHeader` prop to true to make the header follow the user as they scroll down the page.
```

> Using [Sheet](/joy-ui/react-sheet/) component is recommended for wrapping a table. See [usage with Sheet](#usage-with-sheet) to learn more.

Reviewer: Maybe a `:::success` here? Since this is a recommendation for how to succeed with these components. :)

```suggestion
:::success
For `stickyHeader` to work correctly, the Table must be a child of a fixed-height element with overflow `auto` (or `scroll`).
We recommend wrapping your Table with [Sheet](/joy-ui/react-sheet/) for this purpose. 
See [usage with Sheet](#usage-with-sheet) to learn more.
:::
```

{{"demo": "TableStickyHeader.js"}}

### Caption

> Place `<caption>` as the first child of the table.

Reviewer: To give more details.

```suggestion
Add a caption to summarize the contents of a Table by inserting a `<caption>` element as the Table's first child.
```

{{"demo": "TableCaption.js"}}

:::success

> To display caption at the bottom of the table, set [caption side](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/caption-side) to `bottom`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To display a caption at the bottom of the Table, set the [caption side](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/caption-side) to `bottom`:
```

```js
<Table sx={{ captionSide: 'bottom' }}>
```

:::

### Footer

> Use [`<tfoot>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/tfoot) to show the table footer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use [`<tfoot>`](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Element/tfoot) to add a footer to the Table.
```

{{"demo": "TableFooter.js"}}

### Row head

> Set `scope="row"` to `th` elements inside `tbody` to apply the same style as column headers.

Reviewer: To give a little more info about why to use this.

```suggestion
Set `scope="row"` to `<th>` elements inside `<tbody>` to apply the same style as column headers.
The demo below illustrates a common use case: setting the first column to match the header styles.
```

{{"demo": "TableRowHead.js"}}

### Row and column span

> Use `rowSpan` and `columnSpan` to expand a cell to multiple rows or columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `rowSpan` and `columnSpan` to expand a cell across multiple rows or columns.
```

{{"demo": "TableRowColumnSpan.js"}}

> :::info

Reviewer: Maybe `:::warning` is more appropriate, since it highlights a potential problem?

```suggestion
:::warning
```

> **Limitation**: the CSS cannot figure out how apply borders on every corner without duplication.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the CSS cannot figure out how apply borders on every corner without duplicating some.
```

There are two workarounds:

1. Manually remove the right border for a specific cell:

   ```js

>    // In this example, `Canceled` header cell must not have a border on the right.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   // In this example, we remove the border from 
   // the right side of the header cell to avoid duplication.
```

   <th style={{ borderRightWidth: 0 }}>Canceled</th>
   ```

> 2. Set Table's border collapse to `collapse`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Set Table's the border collapse to `collapse`:
```

   ```js

>    <Table sx={{ borderColapse: 'collapse' }}>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   <Table sx={{ borderCollapse: 'collapse' }}>
```

>    // However, this will change the behavior when `stickyHeader` is true.
>    // The border bottom of the sticky headers will no longer sticked.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   // Note that this will change the behavior when `stickyHeader` is true:
   // the bottom border of the sticky header will not "stick".
```

   ```

:::

### Text ellipsis

To truncate the text, set `noWrap` to true.

{{"demo": "TableTextEllipsis.js"}}

:::info
The header cells always truncate the text to keep the header's height predictable.
:::

> ## CSS Variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## CSS variable playground
```

> 

Reviewer: Adding the boilerplate text shared by this section on other pages.

```suggestion

Play around with the CSS variables available to the Table component to see how the design changes. 
You can use these to customize the components with both the `sx` prop and the theme.

```

{{"demo": "TableVariables.js"}}

## Usage with Sheet

> 

Reviewer: Maybe add the import for Sheet here? This is something I've done in other similar sections.

```suggestion
import Sheet from `@mui/joy/Sheet` 
```

Author: Noted.

> When Table becomes a child of [Sheet](/joy-ui/react-sheet/) component, the table header background inherits from the sheet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When Table becomes a child of [Sheet](/joy-ui/react-sheet/) component, the table header background is inherited from the Sheet.
```

{{"demo": "TableSheet.js"}}

### Color inversion

> When [color inversion](/joy-ui/main-features/color-inversion/) is enabled, the table styles will adapt based on its variant.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When [color inversion](/joy-ui/main-features/color-inversion/) is enabled, the Table's styles will adapt based on its [variant](#variants).
```

{{"demo": "TableSheetColorInversion.js"}}

## Common examples

> ### Sort and Selection

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Sort and selection
```

> Use form components such as [`Button`](/joy-ui/react-button/), [`Select`](/joy-ui/react-select/) and [`Switch`](/joy-ui/react-switch/) to create sort and selection features.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use form components such as [Button](/joy-ui/react-button/), [Select](/joy-ui/react-select/) and [Switch](/joy-ui/react-switch/) to create sort and selection features.
```

{{"demo": "TableSortAndSelection.js"}}

### First and last column pinning

{{"demo": "TableColumnPinning.js"}}

### Applying global variants

> Use `theme.variants.*` to apply global variant styles to the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use `theme.variants.*` to apply global variant styles to the Table.
```

{{"demo": "TableGlobalVariant.js"}}

### Scrolling shadows

> Inspired by this [blog post](https://lea.verou.me/2012/04/background-attachment-local/), the shadows appear and hide when scrolling on the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Inspired by this article from Lea Verou on [CSS scrolling shadows](https://lea.verou.me/2012/04/background-attachment-local/), the shadows appear and hide when scrolling on the Table.
```
